= Gnlookup

== Description

Gnlookup integrates free geolocation data from {geonames.org}[http://www.geonames.org/] to your Ruby on Rails application.

== Setting up your Rails application

Take the following steps to configure your Rails application to use Gnlookup.

Add this line to your +Gemfile+:
  gem 'gnlookup', :git => 'https://github.com/lw292/gnlookup.git'

At this point, if you are running Rails 4.x, you will need this line too in the +Gemfile+:
  gem 'protected_attributes'

Then run the +bundle+ command to install:
  bundle install

Now create or modify the database structure:
  rake gnlookup:install:migrations
  rake db:migrate

This will add three tables to the database:
  gnlookup_cities
  gnlookup_regions
  gnlookup_countries

If for some reason you already have tables in your database by the same names, you should resolve the namespace conflicts before running the database migration commands.

== Getting geonames data

Geolocation data can be downloaded for free from the {geonames website}[http://download.geonames.org/export/dump/]. For Gnlookup to work, you will need at least three files:
  countryInfo.txt
  cities5000.zip     # Or cities1000.zip or cities15000.zip. More information below.
  admin1CodesASCII.txt

Download (unzip if necessary) and copy the data files (.txt files) to your Rails application's +db/geonames+ directory (create that directory if necessary).

== Importing the data

Once you've saved the data to your application, you can import the data to your database with this rake task:
  rake gnlookup:import
  
Because it takes a long time to import cities data, by default the system chooses the +cities5000.txt+ file, which includes information about cities with a population larger than 5000. This process will take approximately 5 - 10 minutes.

Alternatively, you can also choose to import the +cities1000.txt+ or the +cities15000.txt+ files instead of the +cities5000.txt+ file:
  rake gnlookup:import CITIES=cities1000
  rake gnlookup:import CITIES=cities15000

The former file will take significantly longer to import. It may also affect the database's performance, and the query results may also be harder to disambiguate. The latter will take much less time to import, but it only contains information about cities with a population larger than 15000.

== Usage

Here are some examples of how to query the database in your code:

  query = "new haven"
  cities = Gnlookup::City.where("name =?", query.split.map(&:capitalize).join(' '))
  # => [#<Gnlookup::City id: 42035, geoname_id: 4839366, region_id: 3611, name: "New Haven", name_ascii: "New Haven", lat: "41.30815", lng: "-72.92816", created_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:12", updated_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:12">,
        #<Gnlookup::City id: 42499, geoname_id: 4924104, region_id: 3614, name: "New Haven", name_ascii: "New Haven", lat: "41.0706", lng: "-85.01441", created_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:19", updated_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:19">,
        #<Gnlookup::City id: 42888, geoname_id: 5003384, region_id: 3616, name: "New Haven", name_ascii: "New Haven", lat: "43.09364", lng: "-84.15331", created_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:24", updated_at: "2014-02-07 19:47:24">]

  cities[0].name
  # => "New Haven"

  cities[0].region.name
  # => "Connecticut"
  
  cities[0].country.name
  # => "United States"
  
  cities[0].lat
  # => "41.30815"
  
  cities[0].lng
  # => "-72.92816"

== Known issues

Sometimes the Census-Designated Place (CDP) names or the administrative level for some towns and cities may be different from what people commonly know. For example, "Amherst, Massachusetts" itself cannot be found as city in the geonames data, but the following places exist:
  Amherst Center, Massachusetts
  North Amherst, Massachusetts
  South Amherst, Massachusetts

Another example, "Washington, DC" is not considered a city in the geonames data, but rather as a "region" with a higher administrative level.

This will cause problems if your code tries to map these place names to cities. Your code either should be flexible enough to accomodate these issues, or you may want to manually add "dummy" records for such cities to your database.

== License

This project rocks and uses MIT-LICENSE. Gnlookup was inspired by and partly adapted from the work of {Resistor Software}[https://github.com/chendo/geonames].